No other country in the world has sent its children abroad for adoptions for a longer time than Korea. NARRATOR: In collaboration with the Associated Press, an investigation into South Korea’s Foreign Adoptions. How did this program that started as a contained program grow dramatically over time to become this industry? The top level of policy makers they were not really interested about the specific rules and regulations to protect the rights of the child. NARRATOR: Accounts of falsified records and faked identities. They've documented these children as abandoned that ensured the child was adoptable in the United States. It would be wonderful if every child born in Korea could stay with their biological family. But that's not the reality. What do you do when you find out your origin story is marked with grievous injustice? NARRATOR: Now on FRONTLINE, South Korea’s Adoption Reckoning. Adoptions could be the issue that South Korea finds most difficult to address. TONG-HYUNG KIM (speaking Korean): >> CHOI YOUNG-JA: >> KIM: >> CHOI: (breath trembling) (sniffles) >> I was adopted into France in 1982. I was adopted... >> I was adopted... >> I was adopted... >> ALL: ...to Sweden... >> ...in 1982. 1974. 1988. KIM: There are about 200,000 people around the world who were adopted out of South Korea. ALL: I was adopted to the United States. KIM: It's believed to be the largest population of adoptees out of any country... >> I was adopted in 1977 to Denmark... >> ...to Denmark in 1972. KIM: ...an adoption program that ran for decades. >> (on computer): What would you tell to your birth mother if she watched on TV right now? My dream would be one day to find you. (voice trembling): Mom and Dad, if you're watching this, by any chance, you could just meet with me? KIM: For decades, Korean television programs have been featuring foreign adoptees in search of their biological parents. To my birth mother, I hope to meet you someday. I hope that someday, I can learn more about you. KIM: These reunions are meant to be feel-good stories, almost fairy tales. But for some adoptees, under the surface is a much darker story. In the years since I began investigating adoptions, a growing number of adoptees have come back to Korea as adults only to discover that what they had been told about their origins was not true. Everything that I knew to be true was suddenly erased. KIM: There are accounts of false identities... >> It feels so careless, like systemic disorganization. KIM: ...fabricated documents... >> They never checked whether my parents existed or not. KIM: ...and even stolen children. You are feeding a very dangerous and very dark system. KIM: This has sparked a national reckoning. A Truth and Reconciliation Commission is now investigating hundreds of cases of possible human rights violations associated with past governments' handling of foreign adoptions. This was all a lie, a lie made up for adoption procedure. KIM: Over the past several years, I've been reporting on how South Korea is dealing with these allegations. This is the one where they banned adoption agencies from touring hospitals and maternity homes for babies. With my colleagues at the Associated Press, we submitted over 100 public record requests... >> What's this outlining? Like, father, mother... >> KIM: ...and examined thousands of pages of documents, many that have never been made public before. Along with "FRONTLINE," we've been speaking to more than 80 Korean adoptees from eight different countries... >> Korea had no place for mixed-race children like me. KIM: ...as well as people who worked at adoption agencies. (speaking Korean): >> KIM: And we've interviewed experts and government officials in South Korea and abroad. There were a lot of children brought to the States who might not have been orphans. (people talking in background) >> KIM: This is the story of how South Korean leaders promoted a historic adoption boom, despite decades of warnings about problems, how Western governments also turned a blind eye, and the consequences that are still playing out today. (rain falling) Many of the adoptees I've met are in the process of trying to piece together their origin stories, including some dating back to the early decades of foreign adoptions. My mother told me when I was growing up that I had been found abandoned. (typewriter keys clacking) My name is Alice Stephens. I was adopted into a family in Philadelphia. I was the youngest child of four. The three other children were biological children of my adoptive parents. My parents gave me a really good life-- everything they gave their other children, all the advantages, all the love. I was in my 30s when my adoptive mother suggested that I find my birth mother. To me, it just seemed like an impossible mission. The big game-changer was DNA, um, for everybody. (chuckles) And I took the DNA test, and it came back, and there was a very close match. So I contacted the woman. It turned out to be my father's cousin. She very quickly figured out who, who my father was. She sent me his obituary, photos. The family gave me lots of information. And then this one photo of my mother dressed up in a hanbok and my father in his U.S. military outfit. It took me a long time to understand just what she did here in Korea, that she, that she was a military prostitute. He kept her in a home that was quite near the base. They were in a common-law marriage. His family told me that he loved her. He left Korea when my mother was six months pregnant. So he knew that she was gonna have his baby. Since my father wasn't Korean, I would not have been recognized by Korean society as a Korean. She knew that life here would not have been good for me, and so, she gave me up. >> One of the reasons that Korean adoption is important to understand is that it represents the first large-scale adoption program in the world. KIM: Eleana Kim is a leading scholar on South Korean adoptions and their legacy. Korea was the top sending country for so long and really laid the groundwork for transnational adoptions to come. KIM: No other country in the world has sent its children abroad for adoptions for a longer time than Korea. (explosion pounds) Korean adoptions really begin in the aftermath of the Korean War. >> By the end of that conflict, there were thousands of children who had been separated from their families or had been orphaned. There were also mixed-race children who had been fathered by U.S. soldiers and born to Korean women. (people talking in background) >> KIM: Korea's first president, Syngman Rhee, saw the mixed-race children as a threat to his rebuilding efforts, which was focused on restoring an old idea of Korea based on ethnical homogeneity. There was a lot of emphasis on maintaining the pure Korean bloodline. In 1954, he issued instructions making adoptions easier. He said, "If a foreigner wishes "to adopt a mixed-race orphan, take the necessary measures." And certainly on the U.S. side, there was