No other country in the world has sent its children abroad for adoptions for a longer time than Korea. NARRATOR: In collaboration with the Associated Press, an investigation into South Korea’s Foreign Adoptions. How did this program that started as a contained program grow dramatically over time to become this industry? The top level of policy makers they were not really interested about the specific rules and regulations to protect the rights of the child. NARRATOR: Accounts of falsified records and faked identities. They've documented these children as abandoned that ensured the child was adoptable in the United States. It would be wonderful if every child born in Korea could stay with their biological family. But that's not the reality. What do you do when you find out your origin story is marked with grievous injustice? NARRATOR: Now on FRONTLINE, South Korea’s Adoption Reckoning. Adoptions could be the issue that South Korea finds most difficult to address. TONG-HYUNG KIM (speaking Korean): >> CHOI YOUNG-JA: >> KIM: >> CHOI: (breath trembling) (sniffles) >> I was adopted into France in 1982. I was adopted... >> I was adopted... >> I was adopted... >> ALL: ...to Sweden... >> ...in 1982. 1974. 1988. KIM: There are about 200,000 people around the world who were adopted out of South Korea. ALL: I was adopted to the United States. KIM: It's believed to be the largest population of adoptees out of any country... >> I was adopted in 1977 to Denmark... >> ...to Denmark in 1972. KIM: ...an adoption program that ran for decades. >> (on computer): What would you tell to your birth mother if she watched on TV right now? My dream would be one day to find you. (voice trembling): Mom and Dad, if you're watching this, by any chance, you could just meet with me? KIM: For decades, Korean television programs have been featuring foreign adoptees in search of their biological parents. To my birth mother, I hope to meet you someday. I hope that someday, I can learn more about you. KIM: These reunions are meant to be feel-good stories, almost fairy tales. But for some adoptees, under the surface is a much darker story. In the years since I began investigating adoptions, a growing number of adoptees have come back to Korea as adults only to discover that what they had been told about their origins was not true. Everything that I knew to be true was suddenly erased. KIM: There are accounts of false identities... >> It feels so careless, like systemic disorganization. KIM: ...fabricated documents... >> They never checked whether my parents existed or not. KIM: ...and even stolen children. You are feeding a very dangerous and very dark system. KIM: This has sparked a national reckoning. A Truth and Reconciliation Commission is now investigating hundreds of cases of possible human rights violations associated with past governments' handling of foreign adoptions. This was all a lie, a lie made up for adoption procedure. KIM: Over the past several years, I've been reporting on how South Korea is dealing with these allegations. This is the one where they banned adoption agencies from touring hospitals and maternity homes for babies. With my colleagues at the Associated Press, we submitted over 100 public record requests... >> What's this outlining? Like, father, mother... >> KIM: ...and examined thousands of pages of documents, many that have never been made public before. Along with "FRONTLINE," we've been speaking to more than 80 Korean adoptees from eight different countries... >> Korea had no place for mixed-race children like me. KIM: ...as well as people who worked at adoption agencies. (speaking Korean): >> KIM: And we've interviewed experts and government officials in South Korea and abroad. There were a lot of children brought to the States who might not have been orphans. (people talking in background) >> KIM: This is the story of how South Korean leaders promoted a historic adoption boom, despite decades of warnings about problems, how Western governments also turned a blind eye, and the consequences that are still playing out today. (rain falling) Many of the adoptees I've met are in the process of trying to piece together their origin stories, including some dating back to the early decades of foreign adoptions. My mother told me when I was growing up that I had been found abandoned. (typewriter keys clacking) My name is Alice Stephens. I was adopted into a family in Philadelphia. I was the youngest child of four. The three other children were biological children of my adoptive parents. My parents gave me a really good life-- everything they gave their other children, all the advantages, all the love. I was in my 30s when my adoptive mother suggested that I find my birth mother. To me, it just seemed like an impossible mission. The big game-changer was DNA, um, for everybody. (chuckles) And I took the DNA test, and it came back, and there was a very close match. So I contacted the woman. It turned out to be my father's cousin. She very quickly figured out who, who my father was. She sent me his obituary, photos. The family gave me lots of information. And then this one photo of my mother dressed up in a hanbok and my father in his U.S. military outfit. It took me a long time to understand just what she did here in Korea, that she, that she was a military prostitute. He kept her in a home that was quite near the base. They were in a common-law marriage. His family told me that he loved her. He left Korea when my mother was six months pregnant. So he knew that she was gonna have his baby. Since my father wasn't Korean, I would not have been recognized by Korean society as a Korean. She knew that life here would not have been good for me, and so, she gave me up. >> One of the reasons that Korean adoption is important to understand is that it represents the first large-scale adoption program in the world. KIM: Eleana Kim is a leading scholar on South Korean adoptions and their legacy. Korea was the top sending country for so long and really laid the groundwork for transnational adoptions to come. KIM: No other country in the world has sent its children abroad for adoptions for a longer time than Korea. (explosion pounds) Korean adoptions really begin in the aftermath of the Korean War. >> By the end of that conflict, there were thousands of children who had been separated from their families or had been orphaned. There were also mixed-race children who had been fathered by U.S. soldiers and born to Korean women. (people talking in background) >> KIM: Korea's first president, Syngman Rhee, saw the mixed-race children as a threat to his rebuilding efforts, which was focused on restoring an old idea of Korea based on ethnical homogeneity. There was a lot of emphasis on maintaining the pure Korean bloodline. In 1954, he issued instructions making adoptions easier. He said, "If a foreigner wishes "to adopt a mixed-race orphan, take the necessary measures." And certainly on the U.S. side, there was also a lot of interest in rescuing those mixed-race children. KIM: Pictures of mixed-race children began appearing in publications in the United States, and adoptions began at a small scale. But they really took off when an evangelical missionary named Harry Holt came onto the scene. >> Harry Holt went to South Korea to find children that he believed God wanted him to save. In Portland, Oregon, a welcoming committee of foster parents... >> Cameras were waiting at the bottom of the steps when the Holt children arrived, and it was broadcast all over the nation. Many of these orphans are ours. There's at least 1,000, maybe 1,500 Black and white American orphans with American fathers. I'd like to say to the American people, that is, open your hearts to these little ones and help to bring them home, where they belong. And that was the point at which the Holts decided to start the Holt adoption program. >> KIM: Together with Syngman Rhee's government, the Holt adoption program pioneered a method called proxy adoption, which allowed Americans to adopt a child in Korea without actually coming to the country by having Holt or another local agency acting as their proxy. Here is Harry Holt-- he is flying 89 of the tots to America... >> Holt brought over planeloads of children. He would charter airplanes. His third trip from Korea brings the total to 76. So this is how you see Holt's program grow over the years. (people talking in background) >> The Reagan Library might have records related to adoption. He met with the Korean president. KIM: Yeah, that's possible. (voiceover): My A.P. colleague Claire Galofaro and I have been focusing our reporting on explaining how South Korea's government, Korean adoption agencies, and Western governments worked together to ship huge numbers of Korean children to the West for decades. The question we asked was, how did this program that started as a really small and contained program grow dramatically over time to become this industry? Before South Korea, there was no systemic way for an American family to adopt a child from abroad. But in 1961, Congress passed a law that defined what an orphan eligible for adoption meant. They defined an orphan as a person who had lost one or both parents to death, disappearance, or abandonment. That language became important, because what our reporting has found is that the adoption agencies relied on the word abandoned, because that made processing adoptions much quicker, much easier. And they could get kids out of Korea and to Western countries faster if they listed them as abandoned. KIM: Korea didn't have-- and still doesn't have-- an automatic birth registration system. So what the Korean adoption system did was register these children with a unique document called orphan ho juk, or an orphan certificate. This document would describe that the child's parents were unknown, and therefore classifying them as abandoned orphans. It didn't matter if the child was, you know, really left on a doorstep or actually had parents who agreed to the adoption of the child. They just documented these children as abandoned. That ensured that the child was adoptable in the United States and other Western nations. When you live your whole life believing that you were abandoned by unknown parents, do you even try to find your roots? Many adoptees I've spoken to said they never really wanted to find their parents, because they didn't really think there was anything to find. This was part of the problem in Choi Young-ja's search for so many years. Her son had gone missing in 1975, after running outside to play with neighborhood kids. She told me she looked everywhere for him, visiting police stations and orphanages. CHOI (speaking Korean): >> KIM: >> CHOI: >> KIM: A few years ago, her search took on a new urgency. CHOI: >> KIM: She submitted her DNA to a database that helps reunite families. CHOI: >> (on computer): But everything we were told, which I believed when I was a kid, was actually a lie. And being adopted, you're asked a lot about... >> KIM: When I first started developing a reporting interest in adoption, I... Like most Koreans, I thought of it as a humanitarian response rooted in the Korean War that was helping orphans find families. And I thought there has to be a deeper explanation than the explanations that the Koreans have shared for a long time. Is this really a war relief effort? By the 1960s, South Korea's adoption program, which had primarily focused on mixed-race children, shifted to children who were fully Korean. That's really the moment when adoptions should probably have been reconsidered, but they just continued. And so, there was essentially, if you want to talk about it in terms of supply and demand, there was a new supply. KIM: This was happening under the dictatorship of President Park Chung-hee, who made it his mission to dig South Korea out of poverty and create a formidable military force to counter threats by North Korea. South Korea is spending 40% of its budget on national defense, and two percent on social welfare. KIM: Over the next decade, they began sending thousands of children overseas in adoptions every year. By sending needy children overseas, it allowed them to reduce the annual costs of supporting orphanages and keep spending on national defense. And by the mid-1970s, Park's government passed a law that removed judicial oversight over adoptions, which made the foreign adoptions of Korean children even easier. Korea's Ministry of Health and Welfare, which oversees adoption policy, wouldn't go on camera, but they did give us written answers to questions we submitted. They attributed the increase in adoptions starting in the 1970s to a reduction in foreign aid that was crucial to their child welfare budget. They also attributed it to an increase in child abandonment in that era. But I talked to Kyung-eun Lee, a former Health Ministry official who oversaw adoption policies starting in 2010. She questions whether there were really so many abandoned children in need of adoption. This number of abandonment of a child, it does not really reflect the reality. KIM: She's been instrumental in passing adoption reform in South Korea. Why was the government so eager to facilitate foreign adoptions? From my understanding, the government did not really care about the details. The top level of policymakers were not really interested about the specific rules and regulations to protect the rights of the child, the safety of the child, the need of the children. What they focus was the welfare need of the, uh, national budget. The orphanage received the government subsidies. If the number of, uh, children in orphanage increased, the welfare cost of government would increase. So if you want to decrease that welfare burden, you just decrease the number of children in orphanage, and orphanages send those children to adoption agencies. KIM: At the time, many poor families were using orphanages to temporarily care for their kids. She said once children left the orphanages, the government pretty much abdicated oversight. This system is totally in, under the power of private agencies, and a fate of a human being is decided by a private entity. How can you expect an appropriate decision to fulfill the interest, the best interest of a child? (people talking in background) >> KIM: The majority of adoptees I've spoken to left South Korea when they were very young and have believed the origin story that they were told. (speaking Korean): >> KIM: But Yoo-ree Kim's case was different. She was 11 when she was adopted to France and always knew that she wasn't an orphan. Her story caused a stir in Korea when she went on television in 2022. (speaking French): >> KIM: Her mother was poor and had placed Yoo-ree and her brother in an orphanage until she could get back on her feet. (both greeting in Korean) >> KIM: Her mother stayed in touch, sending letters and money over the two years they were there. I was waiting for my mother to come and pick us up. I did not understand why Korea was, uh, taking me away from, uh, my motherland. KIM: Did you demand that orphanage worker just contact your father, contact your mother, you know, contact any relative you had? Yes, I did. But she refused. I told her that my mother was unable to do such a thing. She said it was done, and that my mother will never come back. KIM: Yoo-ree and her brother were adopted by a couple who lived in a small town in Southern France. The sexual abuses started on the second day, as soon as we arrived in the family house. KIM: From your adoptive father? Yeah, from my adoptive father. It was almost daily, at the beginning. And I was hoping that someone would show up to investigate. Then I will be able to explain what's happening, and I will be able to go back to Korea. But they never came. KIM: Yoo-ree eventually ran away from home and filed a complaint, but the case was dismissed by a judge due to insufficient evidence. Her adoptive parents and her brother denied the abuse ever happened. In a letter to Yoo-ree, her adoptive father called it a "false accusation". He passed away in 2022. Yoo-ree's adoption paperwork had multiple conflicting stories about how she became an orphan. And she spent years thinking that her parents had abandoned her. Until she went to South Korea. You came to Korea to visit them. Uh-huh. KIM: How did that go? Uh... It went well. My mother insisted I see my father, and I asked to both of them, why did they abandon me, and why did they sign the paper for the adoption? And both of them denied being involved with the adoption. KIM: When did you realize that your parents were telling you the truth, that they never relinquished you? I... It took me years before being able to find the, all the adoption paperwork. And I went to the city hall and requested the family registry. I asked to the employee from the city hall, "What does this paper concretely mean? ", and he told me that I was a Korean citizen who has been living her entire life in Korea. KIM: So based on just looking at this paper, it seems as if you and your brother just never left. No, and we were never adopted. KIM: Kept being... So this was when you realized that, you know, your parents never gave consent. Yeah. KIM: I spoke to Yoo-ree's mother, and she told me she had previously worked at the orphanage and assumed her children would be cared for there, not sent away. Yoo-ree reached out to the Health Ministry for answers about how her adoption could have gone through. They sent me a letter with a vague apology, and they said they will monitor adoption better for the future. KIM: So it says, it sympathizes with the pain that you went through, and... >> No, I don't care about their sympathy. KIM: Yeah, it doesn't acknowledge... >> No. KIM: ...any responsibility of what went through in the '80s. No, no. I was separated for 40 years from my mom and dad, and I have no idea what's, uh, like having a family. It's an immense sense of loss. >> KIM: Yoo-ree is now seeking accountability, both in South Korea and France. Last year, she asked the French authorities to investigate her adoption, and she's submitted her case to South Korea's Truth and Reconciliation Commission. More than 350 people have also filed claims, and while it's impossible to know just how many problems there were over the years, that's thought to be just a fraction of the overall number. The commission is supposed to release its full findings next year. But they agreed to talk to me about what they've learned so far. PARK GEON-TAE (speaking Korean): >> KIM: >> PARK HYEJIN: >> KIM: >> PARK HYEJIN: >> I was adopted through the Holt adoption agency. Social Welfare Society. It was KSS. KIM: Four agencies inside South Korea handle most of the adoptions in the years after the Korean War. KSS. Social Welfare Society. Eastern. Holt International. KIM: They always publicly pointed to the benefits of adoptions as a way of saving vulnerable children. Holt Children Services. From Holt International. Holt Children's Services. KIM: Holt was the largest, handling about half of all the adoptions. In 1977, Holt split in two: Holt Korea, which processed the adoptions of children leaving South Korea; and Holt International, which paired adoptees with families in the West. Holt International was the only adoption agency that would agree to an on-camera interview. This is the historical wall that tells the story of Holt. See, these are all the kids as they were coming off the plane. KIM: At Holt's headquarters in Oregon, Claire and I met Susan Soonkeum Cox. She's a longtime executive and spokesperson for the agency, and is now retired. So Mrs. Holt took lots of pictures. When I first came to work at Holt, Mrs. Holt asked me if I would like to see her scrapbooks. And, of course, I said yes. It was... >> Did you find yourself in any of them? Yes, I did. KIM: She joined Holt in the 1970s, two decades after becoming the 167th South Korean to be adopted through the agency. Is '56 your year, too? Mm-hmm. KIM: She has been a vocal defender of Holt, and says that most adoptions have gone well over the years. That's me. Oh, wow. Will you tell us how you came to work for