NARRATOR: From record heat to raging storms, something strange is happening with the weather. Vice Pres. AL GORE: Global warming is real. NARRATOR: Or is it? FRED PALMER, Western Fuels Association, Inc.: There is no basis to say that more CO2 in the air is going to lead to catastrophic global warming. NARRATOR: But what do we really know about the greenhouse effect? JAMES TREFIL, George Mason University: You're dealing with something where there is legitimate uncertainty in the science. NARRATOR: Is there a real solution to our dependency on fossil fuels? MARTY HOFFERT, New York University: If humankind is going to have a future on this planet, it is absolutely inevitable that we are going to have to find another energy source. NARRATOR: And does America and the world have the political will to tackle what could become the most troubling issue of the 21st century? FRED PALMER: The notion of reducing carbon dioxide emission levels by the year 2010 is a complete fantasy. We are not going to do it, as a society. NARRATOR: Tonight PBS's premier science and investigative series join forces to investigate the truth about global warming. For most of history, humans believed that the weather was governed by forces outside their control, but today we're no longer so sure. Something weird, it's claimed, is going on with the weather, from storms and hurricanes to droughts. Vice Pres. AL GORE: Withering heat waves in Texas and in Florida, cities that are setting thousand-year records for high temperatures- how much more proof do we need that global warming is real? NARRATOR: And the future, some argue, could be apocalyptic, as ice caps melt and sea levels rise as much as 20 feet. DAN LASHOF, Natural Resources Defense Council: Over the last few years, you begin to get increased probability of extreme events. You're beginning to get a sense that these are happening more than they used to. And people are beginning to connect that with global warming. NARRATOR: Vice President Gore is so convinced humans are warming the planet, he advocated an international treaty committing America to drastically reduce emissions from oil, gas and coal. Burning these fossil fuels, he argues, puts greenhouse gases into the atmosphere which trap heat and warm the globe. His opponents object that the risks are exaggerated and any attempt to limit or get rid of oil, gas and coal -which provide 90 percent of our energy - will cause an economic apocalypse, from job losses to recession. FRED PALMER, Western Fuels Association, Inc.: This is the United States government identifying with a policy that would be devastating. What the long-term goal of the vice president of the United States is to ultimately eliminate all fossil fuel use in the United States. That is their goal. NARRATOR: At the heart of this contentious issue is a battle for the truth. When we strip away the rhetoric and politics, what does science really know about global warming? The question has pushed the once obscure science of climatology into the spotlight. But the climate system has turned out to be very complex. TOM M.L. WIGLEY, Nat'l Center for Atmospheric Research: Now we're getting near the end of the run, where the CO2 level is much more than double present day, and- NARRATOR: And scientists' pronouncements about the future of the planet vary widely as they struggle to determine whether the changes in the climate are natural or caused by human beings. TOM M.L. WIGLEY: A 5-degree warming will just change the whole climate system radically. Precipitation patterns will be entirely different. The amounts of precipitation will be entirely different. PAT MICHAELS, Cato Institute: The climate changes, whether or not human beings have something to do with it. You know, there's- there's this little anomaly called the Ice Age. The Earth's climate naturally goes from its current state to having 5,000 feet of ice over Chicago. The climate is unstable. NARRATOR: Tonight NOVA and FRONTLINE set out to uncover the truth about global warming. A lot is at stake. SEN. FRANK MURKOWSKI, (R) Alaska: Any new climate treaty must not result in serious economic harm to the United States. What could be more basic than that? NARRATOR: From the wealth of nations to the future of the planet: Are humans warming the globe? Or are we an insignificant influence compared with the natural forces which have determined the climate for millions of years? JAMES TREFIL, George Mason University: If you sat down and said, "I'm going to design a public issue that is the absolute worst nightmare of every scientist, of every communicator in the world," you couldn't do better than the greenhouse effect. You're dealing with something that's very complicated. You're dealing with something where there's legitimate uncertainty in the science. It's not that people are trying to pull the wool over anybody's eyes. There's legitimate uncertainty. You're dealing with something that has enormous consequences for people. And you're dealing with something whose effects will happen 30 years down the road, you know, when they happen. And then you say- you give people this and say, "Okay, do something about it." TOM BROKAW, NBC News: It is, in fact, a heat wave of global and historic proportions, more than- NARRATOR: The issue is typically framed in the media as a simple question: Is it getting warmer? DAN RATHER, CBS News: Final figures in from Canada today show October '98, was the warmest October on Earth on record. JAMES TREFIL: Unfortunately, when people talk about global warming, it's always in terms of, "Oh, gosh, it was hot last summer." And that doesn't work because weather and climate are two very different things. Climate is sort of long-term things. Weather is short-term- daily, hourly, monthly, whatever. And what we're talking about when we talk about the greenhouse effect is we're talking about climate. NARRATOR: James Trefil is a physicist and science writer who has followed the global warming issue closely. JAMES TREFIL: In order to say it is actually getting warmer now, you have to know what it's been in the past and you have to know that what you're seeing is not just a fluctuation. I mean, I remember when I was a kid, in the 50's, hearing stuff about the coming ice age because there was- we were in a kind of a little cold snap then. And people- I remember pictures on the covers of magazines showing glaciers moving down across American cities. So if you take any short-term timeline, any short-term database for temperature and extrapolate it, you can get crazy results. In order to make an incontrovertible case for global warming, you'd have to have a long-term temperature record, centuries, that was over a large part of the globe. And so you have to look over a long term and say "What's the average been for several hundred years, and is this a significant departure from that?" And that's what's very difficult to do. NARRATOR: Bad weather in one place at one time does not prove the climate is changing. To prove humans are warming the globe requires detailed knowledge of the entire Earth's weather over long stretches of history.