NARRATOR: From record heat to raging storms, something strange is happening with the weather. Vice Pres. AL GORE: Global warming is real. NARRATOR: Or is it? FRED PALMER, Western Fuels Association, Inc.: There is no basis to say that more CO2 in the air is going to lead to catastrophic global warming. NARRATOR: But what do we really know about the greenhouse effect? JAMES TREFIL, George Mason University: You're dealing with something where there is legitimate uncertainty in the science. NARRATOR: Is there a real solution to our dependency on fossil fuels? MARTY HOFFERT, New York University: If humankind is going to have a future on this planet, it is absolutely inevitable that we are going to have to find another energy source. NARRATOR: And does America and the world have the political will to tackle what could become the most troubling issue of the 21st century? FRED PALMER: The notion of reducing carbon dioxide emission levels by the year 2010 is a complete fantasy. We are not going to do it, as a society. NARRATOR: Tonight PBS's premier science and investigative series join forces to investigate the truth about global warming. For most of history, humans believed that the weather was governed by forces outside their control, but today we're no longer so sure. Something weird, it's claimed, is going on with the weather, from storms and hurricanes to droughts. Vice Pres. AL GORE: Withering heat waves in Texas and in Florida, cities that are setting thousand-year records for high temperatures- how much more proof do we need that global warming is real? NARRATOR: And the future, some argue, could be apocalyptic, as ice caps melt and sea levels rise as much as 20 feet. DAN LASHOF, Natural Resources Defense Council: Over the last few years, you begin to get increased probability of extreme events. You're beginning to get a sense that these are happening more than they used to. And people are beginning to connect that with global warming. NARRATOR: Vice President Gore is so convinced humans are warming the planet, he advocated an international treaty committing America to drastically reduce emissions from oil, gas and coal. Burning these fossil fuels, he argues, puts greenhouse gases into the atmosphere which trap heat and warm the globe. His opponents object that the risks are exaggerated and any attempt to limit or get rid of oil, gas and coal -which provide 90 percent of our energy - will cause an economic apocalypse, from job losses to recession. FRED PALMER, Western Fuels Association, Inc.: This is the United States government identifying with a policy that would be devastating. What the long-term goal of the vice president of the United States is to ultimately eliminate all fossil fuel use in the United States. That is their goal. NARRATOR: At the heart of this contentious issue is a battle for the truth. When we strip away the rhetoric and politics, what does science really know about global warming? The question has pushed the once obscure science of climatology into the spotlight. But the climate system has turned out to be very complex. TOM M.L. WIGLEY, Nat'l Center for Atmospheric Research: Now we're getting near the end of the run, where the CO2 level is much more than double present day, and- NARRATOR: And scientists' pronouncements about the future of the planet vary widely as they struggle to determine whether the changes in the climate are natural or caused by human beings. TOM M.L. WIGLEY: A 5-degree warming will just change the whole climate system radically. Precipitation patterns will be entirely different. The amounts of precipitation will be entirely different. PAT MICHAELS, Cato Institute: The climate changes, whether or not human beings have something to do with it. You know, there's- there's this little anomaly called the Ice Age. The Earth's climate naturally goes from its current state to having 5,000 feet of ice over Chicago. The climate is unstable. NARRATOR: Tonight NOVA and FRONTLINE set out to uncover the truth about global warming. A lot is at stake. SEN. FRANK MURKOWSKI, (R) Alaska: Any new climate treaty must not result in serious economic harm to the United States. What could be more basic than that? NARRATOR: From the wealth of nations to the future of the planet: Are humans warming the globe? Or are we an insignificant influence compared with the natural forces which have determined the climate for millions of years? JAMES TREFIL, George Mason University: If you sat down and said, "I'm going to design a public issue that is the absolute worst nightmare of every scientist, of every communicator in the world," you couldn't do better than the greenhouse effect. You're dealing with something that's very complicated. You're dealing with something where there's legitimate uncertainty in the science. It's not that people are trying to pull the wool over anybody's eyes. There's legitimate uncertainty. You're dealing with something that has enormous consequences for people. And you're dealing with something whose effects will happen 30 years down the road, you know, when they happen. And then you say- you give people this and say, "Okay, do something about it." TOM BROKAW, NBC News: It is, in fact, a heat wave of global and historic proportions, more than- NARRATOR: The issue is typically framed in the media as a simple question: Is it getting warmer? DAN RATHER, CBS News: Final figures in from Canada today show October '98, was the warmest October on Earth on record. JAMES TREFIL: Unfortunately, when people talk about global warming, it's always in terms of, "Oh, gosh, it was hot last summer." And that doesn't work because weather and climate are two very different things. Climate is sort of long-term things. Weather is short-term- daily, hourly, monthly, whatever. And what we're talking about when we talk about the greenhouse effect is we're talking about climate. NARRATOR: James Trefil is a physicist and science writer who has followed the global warming issue closely. JAMES TREFIL: In order to say it is actually getting warmer now, you have to know what it's been in the past and you have to know that what you're seeing is not just a fluctuation. I mean, I remember when I was a kid, in the 50's, hearing stuff about the coming ice age because there was- we were in a kind of a little cold snap then. And people- I remember pictures on the covers of magazines showing glaciers moving down across American cities. So if you take any short-term timeline, any short-term database for temperature and extrapolate it, you can get crazy results. In order to make an incontrovertible case for global warming, you'd have to have a long-term temperature record, centuries, that was over a large part of the globe. And so you have to look over a long term and say "What's the average been for several hundred years, and is this a significant departure from that?" And that's what's very difficult to do. NARRATOR: Bad weather in one place at one time does not prove the climate is changing. To prove humans are warming the globe requires detailed knowledge of the entire Earth's weather over long stretches of history. And this has turned out to be an enormously complex scientific challenge. The Earth is a big place. Three quarters of it is covered by water. There are giant ice caps and deserts and mountains. But climate scientists somehow need to take the Earth's global temperature. Today the Earth's weather is measured daily all over the globe by an international network of stations on land and sea which report temperature, pressure, rainfall, humidity and a host of other variables. Such global measurements are the prime data base for climatology. Millions and millions of figures have been collated, corrected, adjusted and synthesized. The problem is, these measurements have only been taken systematically for a century. When averaged, a pattern emerges. During the past 100 years, the global surface temperature has risen by one degree Fahrenheit, or about half a degree Celsius. This is a temperature record of the entire Earth's surface, not just the weather in one place. But is a 1-degree rise over a century a little or a lot? JONATHAN OVERPECK, Nat'l Oceanic and Atmospheric Adm.: What's really remarkable about the warming over the last century is both its magnitude, in terms of half a degree Celsius, and it's the fact that it has been almost worldwide. Almost every site you look at has warmed dramatically since the middle of the last century. [www.pbs.org: The debate on man's impact on warming] NARRATOR: But not everyone's convinced this is evidence that humans are warming the globe. Fred Singer, an atmospheric physicist, is one of a small band of scientists who have become known as greenhouse skeptics. He argues that the 100-year record is not what it appears to be. FRED SINGER, George Mason University: The data are ambiguous. For example, the data show that the climate warmed between 1900 and 1940, long before humanity used much energy. But then the climate cooled between 1940 and 1975. NARRATOR: Only in the last few decades do rising global temperatures seem to coincide with the greenhouse gases we put into the atmosphere. Skeptics like Singer have also argued that long before the industrial revolution, the climate warmed naturally. For example, records show that in the Middle Ages, parts of the world, like Greenland, were warmer than today. The Vikings built settlements there and farmed the land. FRED SINGER: The Vikings were able to grow crops, and life was good in Europe. Cathedrals were being built. There was plenty of food. Climate change is a natural phenomenon. Climate keeps changing all the time. It's either warming or cooling. NARRATOR: But records of one place, like Greenland, during one time, the Middle Ages, may not prove anything. Only by knowing the average global temperature 1,000 years ago can scientists know whether the Earth back then was warmer or colder than today. JONATHAN OVERPECK: What we're looking for is a period in the past - or periods - that are as warm or warmer than today because, of course, if they were that warm, they were probably that warm due to natural processes. And that might give us some clues about what natural processes, as distinct from human ones, could be causing the warming today. NARRATOR: Long before thermometers were invented, human beings recorded the weather, sometimes in great detail. And these records are now being scrutinized by climate historians. CHRISTIAN PFISTER, Environmental Historian, Univ. of Bern: Weather was an extremely important variable in daily life, and most people worked outdoors and they were outdoors for most of the day. They were much more vulnerable, and they knew it. And for this reason, there was extreme interest in any kind of predictions. NARRATOR: Throughout history there have been people who documented events regularly and meticulously- physicians, artisans, and the monks here at Einsiedeln in Switzerland. They recorded the time the cherry blossom appeared, the freezing and thawing of lakes, the state of the wine harvest. CHRISTIAN PFISTER: For instance, a very early cherry blossom is always related to a very warm month of March. If the Lake of Zurich is completely frozen, we know it is the equivalent of two extremely cold months always because we know it from the period when we have both the observations and the measurements. NARRATOR: From these diverse records, climate historians can glean a lot about the past climate. By combining data from many sites, this clever forensic work can yield a detailed picture of areas like central Europe going back more than 1,000 years. Has Pfister found any period in the past as warm as the 1980s and '90s? CHRISTIAN PFISTER: We had other periods which was also very warm, but it was equivalent to the 20th century prior to 1988. I would say this was a period of warm climate, but I would say it was a period of warm natural climate. With the period between 1988 and 1997, there's absolutely no equivalent as far as I can look back. NARRATOR: But this technique, too, is limited. Only a few areas, like Europe, have long-term records which survive. To get a handle on the global climate, scientists have been forced to go beyond human accounts of the weather. Five hundred miles from the North Pole, a frozen lake will be home to a team of scientists for the next few weeks. It's part of an international effort to try and reconstruct the climates of the past. RAYMOND S. BRADLEY, University of Massachusetts: We are here in the Canadian high Arctic, on Ellsmere Island, about 500 miles from the North Pole. And it might seem strange that we would come to this kind of environment to study the problem of global warming. But what we need to do is try to reconstruct the longer-term history of climate, and we do that by using so-called natural archives of climate, things that in some way retain in their structure a measure of how the climate has varied in the past. NARRATOR: Bradley and his team will spend the brief Arctic summer drilling through the ice and sampling the pristine sediments at the bottom of Lake Tuborg. RAYMOND S. BRADLEY: Because the lake is frozen over for most of the winter, what we have is a very brief period during the summer when the snow melts and the sediments are carried into the lake. And that settles out into the lake, and it forms these layers, just like the layers you see in a tree ring or in an ice core. Year by year, we get a nice sedimentary record. NARRATOR: These year-by-year variations in thickness will be used to estimate past temperatures at Lake Tuborg. A thicker layer means there was a warm spring which melted more snow and produced more mud. This expedition yields temperature information going back hundreds of years, but in just one location. To estimate the past average global temperature, such measurements must be made all over the Earth's surface. Thirty-five hundred miles to the south, a team from Scripps Institution of Oceanography are examining the trees in Mammoth Park, California. Franco Biondi and his colleagues have done this many times. FRANCO BIONDI, Scripps Institution of Oceanography: The way the trees grow, they will cover themselves entirely every year with a new layer of wood. And if you take a horizontal section, you're going to see the width of each one of these layers. NARRATOR: Because trees grow all over the world, they are one of the most powerful natural recorders. Their annual rings not only give scientists a built-in date, they also contain a record of past temperature and precipitation. FRANCO BIONDI: Each one of these layers is an annual layer seen in cross-section. The annual layer is formed by these two portions together, the early wood and the late wood. And the width of the layer is our first indication of a climate pattern. So the narrow band that you see here indicates a year when the winter and spring were drier than normal. And then the larger layers that you see here indicate a period when winter and spring precipitation were more abundant than normal. NARRATOR: Trees are very common on land, but for the three quarters of the planet covered by ocean, scientists need other recorders. Like trees, corals can live for hundreds of years and grow at different rates, depending on the temperature at the sea surface. The Earth's temperature is also preserved in the chemistry of ice layers extracted from glaciers all around the world. Each natural recorder produces estimates of temperature and rainfall for a given place and time. Combining them all, scientists have been able to extend back the temperature record for the northern hemisphere about 1,000 years. According to this graph published in 1999, the 20th century's one degree warming stands out dramatically. [www.pbs.org: Visit the "stories in the ice"] But what about Greenland and its controversial medieval warm period? According to the combined data, there was no medieval warm period. Specific regions like Greenland may have been warm, but the average global temperature back then was cooler than today. Even though the data is preliminary, Bradley is convinced the climate of the 20th century is unprecedented. RAYMOND S. BRADLEY: We think this warm period 1,000 years ago was just a regional anomaly. We find almost no period in that whole 1,000 years which has temperatures as high as we've seen in the last part of the 20th century. And in particular, the 1990s were exceptionally warm. It was an incredibly unusual decade, and we have no evidence that there was a decade quite like the 1990s all the way back 1,000 years. NARRATOR: If this finding holds up, does it prove humans are causing global warming? Some greenhouse skeptics like MIT's Richard Lindzen urge caution. RICHARD S. LINDZEN, Mass. Institute of Technology: Well, it leaves out a couple of things. First of all, one has to distinguish the statement "warming," meaning temperature has gone up, from "warming," meaning man has caused temperature or something has caused temperature to increase. NARRATOR: How can we be sure that recent warming is man-made rather than natural? And what evidence is there to link this temperature increase to human activity? Perhaps no man has done more to help answer this question than Charles David Keeling. Forty years ago, nobody knew for sure whether industrial greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide were increasing in the atmosphere or whether they were being absorbed by the oceans. In 1957, Keeling set out to discover which was right. Taking advantage of the special funding available in the International Geophysical Year, he set out with the latest analyzers to begin what would become his life's work. CHARLES D. KEELING, Scripps Institution of Oceanography: This program afforded me an opportunity, even though I was just out of school, practically, and a very young man, to, commandeer enough resources to see that these analyzers were put in several places, and rather quickly at that. One analyzer was put in Little America Antarctica, and shortly after, another one was placed on a mountain in Hawaii called Mauna Loa. NARRATOR: The ideal place to measure carbon dioxide is away from cities, which produce it and distant from vegetation, which absorbs it. On the Hawaiian mountain of Mauna Loa, Keeling found the ideal spot. Located at 11,000 feet in the midst of a barren lava field, he began to sample the Earth's air. CHARLES D. KEELING: At Mauna Loa Observatory we started the measurements in March, 1957, and I expected the concentration would be perhaps almost dead constant, knowing nothing else as a hypothesis, but that wasn't what happened. The concentration rose for several months, and then it dropped. And it dropped all during the period from May until September. And then it started to rise again. As soon as we saw that much information, less than a year's worth of data, it was pretty obvious that we were looking at the breathing of the plants in the northern hemisphere because they absorb carbon dioxide during their growing period in temperate and high latitudes, and then it's released again in a cyclic process in the wintertime. NARRATOR: Keeling's sensitive measurements had picked up the Earth's respiration. Every spring, plants bloomed, sucking carbon dioxide out of the air. Every fall, CO2 was released back into the air as the plants decayed. But Keeling noticed that year by year, the total concentration of CO2 increased. Superimposed on the annual cycle was a rising curve. Each year, more CO2 was inhaled and exhaled by the biosphere. Over 40 years, the concentrations rose from 330 parts per million to almost 370 parts per million. The Keeling curve appeared to prove what many had suspected, that humans were changing the composition of the atmosphere. But why should adding an invisible, non-toxic gas be cause for concern? Compared to the major atmospheric gases - oxygen and nitrogen - the amount of CO2 is minuscule, but through an accident of physics - the greenhouse effect -its consequences are significant. Perhaps the most dramatic example of the greenhouse effect is the Earth itself. But for this effect, the Earth would be frigidly cold. Of the energy coming from the sun, about half of the light gets scattered and absorbed before it reaches the surface. The rest is radiated back as heat or infrared radiation. In the absence of a greenhouse effect, this heat energy would escape back into space, leaving the Earth with an average temperature of zero degrees Fahrenheit. All water would freeze. The reason this doesn't happen is that greenhouse substances - gases like carbon dioxide and methane - and water vapor and clouds - all act to trap escaping infrared radiation. The net effect is to cause the Earth's surface to warm up to an average of