NARRATOR: He warned us, more than 25 years ago, that
 human activity was changing the Earth'sclimate. Since then,
 the world has gotten hotter, and NASA scientist James Hansen's
 warning has been echoed by the vast majority of climate
 scientists everywhere. 
JAMES HANSEN (NASA Goddard Institute for Space
 Studies) : Global warming in the past century is about
 eight-tenths of a degree Celsius, with most of it occurring in
 the last 30 years. 
NARRATOR: And now the warnings have become more urgent. 
JAMES HANSEN: I don't agree that we've passed the point
 where there's no hope, but, but, on the other hand, we're
 darned close. 
NARRATOR: Close, because scientists have uncovered a
 new factor that may be masking the full impact of global
 warming. Called global dimming, it's powerful enough to alter
 temperatures in a matter of days. It may have contributed to
 the world's deadliest drought, and it could mean that the
 Earth's climate is about to start heating up as fast as the
 most dire predictions. 
JAMES HANSEN: I think we have less than a decade to
 avoid passing what I call "point of no return." 
NARRATOR: What will the future of our planet be, now
 that we're Dimming the Sun ? Right now on NOVA. 
Google is proud to support NOVA in the search for knowledge:
 Google. 
What would you ask an oil company? What is being done to make
 us less reliant on oil? That's a question. If we're going to
 keep our dependency on oil, primarily, for the coming years,
 the initial future years, where's it coming from? 
Major funding for NOVA is provided by the Howard Hughes
 Medical Institute, serving society through biomedical research
 and science education: HHMI. 
And by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and by
 contributions to your PBS station from viewers like you. Thank
 you. 
NARRATOR: September 12th, 2001, the aftermath of
 tragedy: ironically, as America mourned, the weather all over
 the country was unusually clear and sunny. Eight hundred miles
 west of New York, in Madison, Wisconsin, climate scientist
 David Travis was on his way to work. 
DOCTOR DAVID TRAVIS (University of
 Wisconsin-Whitewater) : Around the 12th, later on in the
 day, when I was driving to work, and I noticed how bright blue
 and clear the sky was, and...at first I didn't think about it,
 then I realized the sky was unusually clear. 
NARRATOR: For 15 years, Travis had been researching a
 relatively obscure topic: whether the vapor trails left by
 aircraft were having a significant effect on the weather. In
 the aftermath of 9/11, the entire U.S. fleet was grounded, and
 Travis finally had a chance to find out. 
DAVID TRAVIS: It was certainly, you know, one of the
 tiny positives that may have come out of this—an
 opportunity to do research—that hopefully will never
 happen again. 
NARRATOR: Travis suspected the grounding might make a
 small, but detectable, change to the weather, but what he
 observed was both immediate and dramatic. 
DAVID TRAVIS: We found that the change in temperature
 range during those three days was just over one degree
 centigrade. And you have to realize that from a layman's
 perspective that doesn't sound like much, but from a climate
 perspective that is huge. 
NARRATOR: The temperature range is the difference
 between the highest and the lowest temperatures in a 24-hour
 period. Usually, it stays much the same from day to day, even
 if the weather changes, but not this time. Travis had come
 across a new and powerful phenomenon, one which would call
 into question all our predictions about the future of our
 planet. 
The trail that would lead to this extraordinary discovery of
 global dimming began 40 years ago, in Israel, with the work of
 Gerry Stanhill, a young English immigrant. Trained as a
 biologist, Gerry got a job helping to design irrigation
 systems. His task was to measure how strongly the sun shone
 over Israel. 
DOCTOR GERALD STANHILL (Israel Ministry of
 Agriculture) : It was important, for this work, to
 measure solar radiation, because that is the factor that
 basically determines how much water crops require. 
NARRATOR: For a year, Gerry collected data from a
 network of light meters. The results were much as expected and
 were used to help design the national irrigation system. But,
 20 years later, in the 1980s, Gerry decided to update his
 measurements. What he found stunned him. 
GERALD STANHILL: Well, I was amazed to find that there
 was a very serious reduction in sunlight, the amount of
 sunlight in Israel. In fact, if we compare those very early
 measurements, in the 1950s, with the current measurements,
 there was a staggering 22 percent drop in the sunlight, and
 that really amazed me. 
NARRATOR: A 22 percent drop in solar energy was simply
 massive. If it were true, surely the effects would be obvious
 to every Israeli. The figures were hard for other scientists
 to take seriously, so when Gerry published, his results were
 ignored. 
GERALD STANHILL: I must say that the publi
