NARRATOR (V.O.)

In October 2012 the European Union adopted Directive 2012/28/EU on certain permitted uses of orphan works.

The directive is designed to promote the digitisation of and lawful intra-EU online access to orphan works contained in the collections of libraries, educational establishments, museums, archives, audiovisual heritage institutions and public service broadcasting organisations.

These organisations have a public interest mission to preserve, restore, reproduce, and provide online access to their collections, for cultural and educational reasons.

After completing a diligent search, these organisations will be permitted to use orphan works for these purposes.

The directive applies to works protected by copyright that are first published or, in the absence of publication, broadcast in an EU country.

It covers published books, newspapers, magazines or other writings; works embedded in those categories; and cinematographic or audiovisual works and phonograms.

Organisations covered by the directive must ensure that a diligent search for rightsholders is carried out in good faith by consulting the appropriate sources.

Material that is considered orphaned in one EU country has the same status in all other EU countries.

If a rightsholder of what is considered an orphan work reappears, the directive envisages the possibility of putting an end to the orphan work status and receiving fair compensation.

A single Europe-wide publicly accessible online database will be set up, containing information on orphan works, including results of searches for rightsholders and use made of orphan works by organisations.

Organisations may use an orphan work only to achieve aims related to their public-interest missions: to make the orphan work available to the public, and to reproduce it for digitisation, indexing, cataloguing, preservation or restoration.

The directive has applied since 29 October 2014 and had to become law in EU countries on the same day.

Orphan works are works still protected by copyright but whose authors or other rightsholders are not known or cannot be located or contacted to obtain copyright permissions.
