@voice am_michael
@lang b
@pause 400

Your agent websearches. You get one answer and a green check. You never see what was skipped.

Agent Science is the truth layer for what builders believe and use. Not another answer engine. When you ask, you should see what was searched — every alias route, every tier — plus what the field actually runs.

Open the visibility panel on the hosted URL. This is pane one b: angles searched, shallow-route warnings, source balance. I finally know what my agent did — not just a green verified badge.

When practitioner adoption outruns a generalized paper, we stamp CONTRARY TO RESEARCH. The Ralph loop beat on this desk is an example: the field moved faster than the literature. We say so, with why.

The rule never bends. Cite the document verbatim, or print that you could not. No citation — no verdict. That is enforced in code, not by prompt.

The same engine clears a documentary script. Paste narration about a paper or a historical claim — you get the exact sentence from the instrument, not a summary. Or you get UNSOURCED with a named cause.

Archive rights are harder. Copyright never evaluated is not permission. We refuse with holder states not evaluated — that honesty is the product.

We pointed Agent Science at our own marketing. Five claims from our pitch. Two verified. One misattributed. Two refused — including ninety-four percent of film archives, because the object did not support the headline.

Run the same subject twice. Our sealed prediction on the hosted URL: run A paid one Parallel call for discovery. Run B hit the shelf — zero Parallel, one corpus hit. The dictionary compounds.

Two hundred sixty-five claims live on the shelf today. The truths dashboard ranks what builders actually ask — GitHub stars, blogs, peer queries — a dictionary, not a chat log.

Under the hood: Parallel search with the official SDK, Gemini on Vertex, Cloud Run, and the Agent Development Kit as the default clearance engine. Judges can read GET slash partners for the manifest.

Agent Science — the truth layer for agentic builders. Open the link. Run your search. See the full panel.
